 Disuria. Disuria means pain and burning while passing urine. And the most common cause for it is urinary tract infection or UTI. When a patient complains of burning maceration, ask precisely when does the burning pain occur? Burning pain at the end of micrution is typical of cystitis and bladder stones. While severe pain during micrution is seen in urethral infections and a stone in the urethra. Urinary infections are also associated with fever with chills, so ask about that. Then ask history of Pyruland discharge per urethra, a feature of Guno-Coccal urethritis. If yes, ask history of exposure also. In elderly patients, ask about associated prosthetic symptoms like hesitation, urgency, poor urine stream or night frequency. Residual urine in a patient with enlarged prostate is a common sight for urinary infections. So for all practical purposes, disuria indicates urinary infection and sometimes urinary stone. Our aim of treatment will be to treat the infection and give symptomatic relief from the burning pain. First ask for a routine urine examination, mainly looking for parcels. If parcels are present, a urine culture and antibiotic sensitivity test should be done, and accordingly, the appropriate antibiotic should be advised. But in general practice, it is neither practical nor necessary to advise urine culture in each and every patient. So just get a urine routine examination done and start treatment with a broad spectrum urinary antibiotic. You can give norfloxacin 400 milligram BD or libo-floxacin 500 milligrams OD or gramoneg 1 TDS. Along with it, a urinary alkalinizer like cital or citralca, 1 T-spoonful diluted in a glass of water three times a day should be given. Because all urinary antibiotics, except mandala mine, act more effectively in alkaline pH. For relief from the burning sensation, prescribe a urinary analgesic like pyridium or flavocate or nephrodisiic 1 TDS. If the pain is severe, an analgesic like conviflam or butapropzyone may be given. Lastly, advise the patient to drink a lot of water and fluids, at least 2 to 2.5 liters per day. Especially soothing are fluids like coconut water and barley water. Most of the urinary infections will be cured by this treatment. If the urinary track infection does not respond or is recurrent, then certain investigations must be done. 1. Ask for a urine culture and antibiotic sensitivity test. The organism may be resistant to the antibiotic which you have prescribed. Once you know the organism and the drugs to which it is sensitive, the correct drug can be prescribed. Then ask for an x-ray of the KUB and ultra-sonography. These detect any stones or any anatomical anomaly that may be lodging the infection. If these investigations are inconclusive, a cystoscopy may be needed. Always remember that recurrent urinary track infections are usually associated with another pathology like stone, prostate, diverticulum, etc. So if the patient gets UTI for the second or third time, always refer him to a urologist for proper investigations.