 Low backache Low backache is a common complaint in all adult age groups, especially in females. The pain increases on bending forwards or on trying to lift weight from the ground. It is particularly more intense in the morning hours. Though usually the backache signifies the pathology in the lumbosecural spine and the paraspinal muscles. It can also arise from the kidneys and in females from the pelvic organ inflammation and dysmenorrhea. First we will consider mild backache. If the backache is mild and recent of short duration, then give an anti-inflammatory drug like Diplofinac, 50 milligram TDS for 3 to 5 days, along with a calcium preparation like tab shellcal 500 milligrams. A gentle massage with Diplofinac gel or move and formantations twice a day will have a soothing effect. Also see whether the patient is pale because any patients often complain of backache. So if the patient is pale, treat the enemy also with a hematonic. Now we will talk about another type of presentation that is chronic mild backache. If mild backache is present for a long time or comes on and off repeatedly, then a long acting NSAID should be prescribed like tab over on SR 75 milligrams or worth SR 1 OD and along with it calcium with vitamin D3 like tab calcium X4 or sea law should be given. And a little change in lifestyle plus back exercises is very important to control this chronic backache. Now what is this change in lifestyle? First of all the mattress used for the night's sleep should be very firm. Soft sponge mattresses should be immediately discarded. Use a choir mattress or a thin cotton mattress. Secondly correct sitting posture is very important particularly for those with sedentary jobs like computer operators. Use a hard surface chair with back support. If that is not possible then use a lumber belt with back support. Also, the height of the chair should be adjusted such that the legs should be firmly on the ground and never hanging in the air. Thirdly, while lifting anything from the floor the patient should sit down by flexing the leg and then lift it and stand. He should not bend forwards to lift it. The back should always remain straight. Lastly, regular back exercises to strengthen the back muscle are most useful. Lie down flat on the stomach. Raise one leg at a time to 30 degrees, hold for 5 seconds and then relax. Then lying down supine, fold the legs with feet on the floor and straighten one leg in the air, hold it for 30 seconds alternately. Details of the exercises can be read in the book. To say in short, with these measures, exercises and small dose of NSAID, most of the mild back kicks can be successfully treated. If there is no response, then further investigations and referal to an orthopedic surgeon should be done. But before we proceed to that, let us study how to examine a patient with back kick. First, ask about the severity of pain, whether it is mild or severe and whether it is localized to the low back region or it radiates along the legs as in sciatica and disc prolapse. Then ask how it started, insidiously or suddenly. A sudden onset while bending or lifting something is seen in prolapse interpretable disc or a sprain of the paraspinal muscles. Now inspect the back for any gibbers or swelling and pulpit for tenderness by a firm pulsation over the spines and paraspinal regions. Now perform two tests, SLR test and test for EHL weakness. For SLR test or the straight leg raising test, ask the patient to lie down supine and lift one leg straight to 90 degrees. Pain at the gluteal region or back means a positive test. Find the angle at which the pain appears. Then ask the patient to dorsiflex the great toe against resistance. weakness of dorsiflexion, that is weakness of extensor heluses longest, indicates a compressive legion in the spine. To summarize, inspect and pulpit the spine for tenderness and swelling. Start the patient to lie down and do the straight leg raising or SLR test and test for the power of dorsiflexion of great toe. If any of these are positive, you must consult an orthopedic surgeon. If there is any neurological deficit, motor or sensory, then you must refer the patient immediately without wasting time. Also, you must consult the orthopedic surgeon if the pain is so severe that the patient cannot walk or stand properly. Or if there is shooting pain along one leg, and if there is no response to bedrest and anti-inflammatory drugs. Now we will come to the type of cases generally referred to as sciatica. When the pain radiates from the back to the thigh or to the leg, usually posteriorly along the course of the sciatic nerve, the condition is termed as sciatica. This type of pain is usually associated with a positive SLR test and is due to prolapse intervertebral disc or osteoarthritis of spine, where the nerve roots are compressed or irritated by the prolapse disc or osteophytes of the vertebrae. The site of pain and numbness depends on which disc is affected and is compressing the roots. If the prolapse is of L5S1 disc, the pain radiates along the back of the thigh and leg, with numbness on the back of calf and soul. If the prolapse is of L4-5 disc, then the pain radiates along the lateral aspect of thigh and leg, with weakness of dorsiflexion of grade 2. And if the prolapse is of L3-4 disc, the pain radiates to the anterior aspect of thigh and leg, with difficulty in clamping the stairs due to quadruceps weakness. Now we shall see how to treat these cases of acute severe backache. First of all, the patient should be put to complete bedrest, of course on a firm mattress. Given injection of dichlorothinac, 3CCIM, and in more severe cases, give a steroid injection, like injection decaedron 2CC IV also. This is the anti-inflammatory treatment. For more severe pain, a stronger analgesic will have to be given additionally, like injection 4-2in, or ketorolyc, or tremadol. Orally, give full dose of 1 or 2 anti-inflammatory drugs, like tab over on 51TDS, or Nimagic 100 milligrams 1BD, or tab brufin 600 milligram 1TDS, or tab worldcoxid 20 milligrams BD. Just remember that the slow release preparations, that is SR preparations, should not be given for acute severe pain, they are less effective in the management of acute pain relief. In addition, if the pain is severe, you may give a short course of steroid, like tab Ysolone 5 milligram TDS for 5 days, or tab defnellone 6 milligrams OD for 5 days. When you give high dose NSAID, that too with a steroid you must give an anti-sid, and cap Ome's PendoPresol or RebePresol. In acute pain, a tranquilizer like tab Alprazolam 0.25 milligram once or twice a day is also useful. If there is paraspinal muscle spasm, add a muscle relaxant, like tab designed in 2 milligram TDS, or tab Robinx 500 milligram TDS, or their combinations with anti-inflammatory drugs. The drug therapy should also be complemented by complete bedrest, shortwave diathermi or SWD for the Lumber Spine, which is given twice daily for 5 days, and pelvic traction with 6 to 8 kilogram weight for 1 hour twice daily. When the pain is severe or radiating, the basic investigation that is X-ray of the Lumber Sackerel Spine, LS Spine APN lateral should be taken first. Look for osteoarthritis, intervertebral disc prolapse, spondylolysthesis, or tuberculosis of spine. Since the acute pain subsides, the treatment will continue as we discussed for mild pain, with a Lumber Belt, back exercises, and SR preparations of anti-inflammatory drugs. If the pain does not subside quickly, then the orthopedic surgeon will investigate further with MRI scan of the spine or myelography and decide whether any operative treatment is necessary. So timely consultation with orthopedic surgeon and treatment under the guidance of an orthopedic surgeon is important.