 In this lecture, we will discuss the basic aspects of pulmonary tuberculosis. I will consider this as one of the most important lectures, because I am aware of the alarmingly high incidence of pulmonary tuberculosis in our country and our inability to restrict it in spite of the advent of effective chemotherapy agents and the efforts on government level. I feel that every general practitioner should be aware of this disease, have a thorough knowledge about this disease and should actively participate in the treatment and follow-up of these cases. The general practitioner can play a very important role in the various steps of management of pulmonary tuberculosis. The first important role is in suspecting and detecting the case. The second important role is in the institution of correct chemotherapy. And the third and most important role is in persuading the patient to take the drugs without a break for the prescribed period. Only a family doctor can guide the patients through the total management of the disease and help to control the spread of the disease. The first step is to suspect and detect pulmonary tuberculosis in its early stages. Now when to suspect and how to do that? Every case of cough for more than 15 days must be investigated with an x-ray of the chest and sputum for AFB. In every case of cough not responding to antibiotics, cough with copious expectation or cough with the slightest hemoptysis, x-ray of the chest and sputum AFB must be checked. If fever, whether low grade or high, does not respond to antibiotics and anti-malarials, tuberculosis must be ruled out. In any case of chronic fever of more than two weeks duration, even if Vidal is positive, x-ray of the chest must be taken. In every case of breathlessness, width or without wrong, tuberculosis must be ruled out. Even if the case is frankly asthmatic, an x-ray of the chest must be taken once. Every maciated patient, every patient complaining of loss of weight or severe anorexia, tuberculosis must be ruled out. Lastly, if a sputum positive case of pulmonary tuberculosis is detected, the house may be investigated. In some cases it may not be acceptable to x-ray every member of the family, but the family doctor should keep in mind and should be aware and alert when any of them comes to him with fever or cough. To repeat, you must have a high degree of suspicion for tuberculosis in patients who complain of cough for 15 days or more, cough not responding to antibiotics, cough with copious expectation, cough with hemoptysis, any chronic fever for more than 15 days, every case of breathlessness, every maciated patient, every patient with loss of weight or severe anorexia and relative of a sputum positive case. Now once that we have suspected tuberculosis, what investigation should we do to confirm or rule out tuberculosis? In a suspected case, you should ask for hemoglobin WBC count ESR, x-ray of the chest and sputum for AFB. The chief instrument for diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis is the x-ray of the chest. The sputum for AFB tells you whether the case is infective or non-infective, and ESR is essential for the follow-up of the case. TBIGM and TBIGG are suggestive only if they are strongly positive. TBIGM suggests active disease while TBIGG suggests past or chronic infection, but negative test of these immunoglobulins does not always rule out tuberculosis. Now once the diagnosis is made, the treatment should be started. We will consider the treatment in two parts. First is the chemotherapy and second is the general care and instructions for the patient. The present trend for chemotherapy is short term chemotherapy using bacteria's idol drugs. The most commonly used and recommended regime for primary treatment of tuberculosis is to give four drugs, refampicine, ethambutol, isoniazide and pyrazinamide for first two months, and then follow up with refampicine, ethambutol and ionage for further six to eight months. The drugs should not be stopped after a fixed time like six months, but after the patient is cured. When there are no symptoms, normal ESR X-ray shows clearing of the legion or fibrosis. Now we will come to the dosage of the drugs. If the patient is well-built, wait about 45 kg, we give the full dose of all the drugs. That is, streptomycin 1 gram I am daily, ionage 300 milligrams daily, refampicine 450 milligrams in the morning on empty stomach, ethambutol 800 milligrams after dinner and pyrazinamide 1500 milligrams daily. If the patient is thin and emaciated with weight below 45 kg, then we give streptomycin 0.75 grams, ionage same dose that is 300 milligrams, refampicine 300 ethambutol 600 and pyrazinamide 1 gram daily. For streptomycin, you have to consider one more factor that is age. If the age is more than 50 years, the dose should be reduced to 0.75 grams and in elderly patients it is best avoided. WHO and Government of India recommends the dots treatment, where the drugs are given three times a week under supervision so that the patients do not default. In dots treatment, we give ionage 600 milligrams, refampicine 450 milligrams, pyrazinamide 1500 milligrams and ethambutol 1200 milligrams three times a week. You can read the details in the book. Now we will study the side effects of these drugs. When you give streptomycin, you should be worried about the 8th nerve damage. If at any time during the treatment, the patient complains of gidinous, stop streptomycin immediately. This may occur after two injections or may be after 60-70 injections. But if you continue to give streptomycin in spite of gidinous, then the patient will have permanent 8-node damage, deafness and prolonged gidinous. So if there is gidinous, stop streptomycin. Hyptomycin injection may also have to be stopped due to pain at the injection site. Some people cannot tolerate the pain. Now ionage causes peripheral neuritis. But if it is combined with vitamin B6 as it is in tab isokin, then this complication does not occur. Some patients get skin papules looking like acne all over the body, but these are harmless and reduce after ionage is stopped. Refampicillin may cause GI intolerance, nausea, vomiting in an occasional patient and will have to be changed. But the main worry with refampicillin is hepatic damage. If patient on treatment gets jaundice, first stop refampicillin. And when patient is on refampicillin, every time you see the patient, you must look at the sclerop or jaundice. Another thing you should instruct the patients about is that when the patient takes refampicillin, the urine will be orange-red in color. As a routine after starting AKT, after 15 days, get liver function tests done. Any rise in enzymes, SGPT and SGOT or serum bilirubin will indicate hepatic damage. Now ethamutol is a relatively harmless drug, but it can cause retrobulber neuritis and optic nerve damage. This is a very rare complication in the therapeutic doses of ethamutol. You should ask the patient on follow-up whether there is any diminish in vision and if any visual symptom is there, then you must consult an ophthalmologist and stop ethamutol. Lyracinamide may also cause nausea, vomiting and joint pains. Like refampicillin, it is hepatotoxic and should not be given to a patient with liver damage or jaundice. Now if the patient on anti-dv treatment gets jaundice, then what do you do? If the patient gets jaundice, you should stop all the drugs. Start the treatment for jaundice that is bedrest, fat-free diet with lots of sugar or IV glucose, phospholipids like tab essentiality, dyes, cilimarin, leopiftidu, sorbilin and high doses of vitamin B complex. Serum bilirubin and liver enzyme should be done every 3 or 5 days. Use the jaundice settles, acute phase is over, serum bilirubin starts declining and liver enzyme comes down. Then start injection cancine, ionic and ethamutol. But do not give refampicin or pyrazinamide without consulting a physician. Second common problem is a female patient with tuberculosis becoming pregnant. Now what drugs to give? The safest drugs are ionic and ethamutol. And if the disease is extensive, you can give refampicin and canamicin with duorisk. Avoid streptomycin and pyrazinamide. Pyrazinamide may also be given in severe cases, but streptomycin is never to be given.