 Now, we come to the general instructions. I instruct the patient to take complete bed rest at home, minimum talking and minimum exertion to rest the lungs, and of course absolutely no smoking. The present trend is to allow the patient to continue work, but I feel that bed rest is very essential for patients of pulmonary tuberculosis. Any deceased organ needs rest, and any exertion, whether it is a physical exertion or excessive talking, is a strain to the lung. In the days when anti tuberculosis drugs were not available, millions of patients of tuberculosis were cured by rest alone, whereas none of the powerful drugs now available can cure tuberculosis if given alone. Such a powerful aid in the treatment of tuberculosis should not be neglected. Only very early cases on sedentary jobs may be allowed to work. All complicated cases, bilateral disease, extensive disease, patients doing hard manual work, they must be advised complete bed rest till the disease is curing. Now coming to the other instructions. As long as the patient is put on positive, and as long as there is cuff with expectation, the patient should stay in isolation. Isolation from the other family members. He should cover his mouth with handkerchief while coughing, sneezing or talking. He should avoid close contact with the family members, especially the children who can get infected very easily. Isolation is nearly impossible these days, but as far as possible a separate room should be allotted to the patient till he is expectorating. If there is a lot of expectation, collect it in a separate cup and destroy it or dispose it of properly. Once the patient becomes put on negative, usually after 2-3 months of chemotherapy, he may mix up normally with family and friends, but care must be taken to cover the mouth while coughing and sneezing. Now regarding dietary restrictions. There are no restrictions. On the contrary, the patient should eat good nutritious food. When treatment is started, the appetite will start improving, and good protein rich food with milk, eggs, fruits should be taken to regain the weight which was lost and to improve the body resistance. Of course, if the patient is having cough, he must avoid oily food, cold drinks, etc. The patient should come for fall-up after 1 month initially and then every 2 months. Every time the patient comes for checkup, you should ask about his symptoms, particularly the cough, fever, appetite, cough and fever should progressively decrease with treatment. Look for pallor, jaundice, and if the patient is taking streptomycin, ask for gidinous. The X-ray of the chest should be checked every 2 months in the initial period, and along with it, sputum for AFV, blood for hemoglobin and ESR, and the body weight should be checked. If the patient complains of gidinous during fall-up, what should be advice? First of all, stop streptomycin. Stop streptomycin give injections of B complex like neurobeyond 1 ampoule a day for 10 days. Cap Bikosules 1 Bd till gidinous is reduced, and tabsts cougar on 1 TDS for severe gidinous. Similarly, if a patient on treatment loses his appetite, first think of jaundice. Look at the sclera and palpate the liver. If there is no jaundice, then think of anymia. And of course, look whether the drugs are causing anorexia. You may have to reduce the dose, particularly of repampicin and ethambutol, if the patient gets nausea. Another thing you could advise is to give the drugs at different times instead of giving them all together. If the patient complains of tingling of limbs, stops streptomycin and INH temporarily, and give high doses of vitamin B complex. Now when the patient follows up, and you find that there is no improvement in the patient's condition, his symptoms or x-ray picture within one month. Then you have to think of certain common conditions. Most commonly this is due to severe anemia, inadequate rest, and the patient's irregularity in treatment. If these factors are noted, they should be corrected. But if the patient is a regular in treatment and taking rest, then you must consult a physician. Because in such a case, the tubercle bacilli may be resistant to our first-line drugs, and you may have to give second-line drugs like cancin, thia citazone, cyclocerine or ethyonomide. Or the diagnosis itself may be wrong. The x-ray shadow may be due to malignancy or some fungal infection. But that is a specialist's problem. Consult a physician or a chest physician. In the end, let me tell you what is the role of the family doctor in the treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis. The family doctor can definitely treat all uncomplicated cases of pulmonary tuberculosis on his own. Yet, you should remember that this is a chronic disease, long-drawn treatment, and cure depends not only on your skill, but the patient's cooperation, regularity in treatment, and such other factors also. So it is always wise to take the advice of a physician first, and then follow the treatment, so that the patient does not blame you if the treatment is prolonged. As a family doctor, you have a very important role to play, in encouraging the patient to take the full course of treatment. You should stress again and again that TB is curable, but only if treated properly. Medicines must be taken very regularly, religiously, till the disease is cured. Many patients stop medicines after the symptoms are reduced, and this is where your skill in convincing the patient is required. If the patient has financial pressures, no problem. Dots treatment is available at all government hospitals free of cost. What is important is to see that the treatment is properly taken by the patient, and that he does not spread the disease to other family members.