 Now, coming to the control of blood sugar through oral antidebietic drugs, you have to first decide which drug to use and then its correct dose. The dose is decided by the individual needs and individual response, so it is variable. You start with a minimum expected dose of the drug, check fasting and post-prandial blood sugar after one week, increase or decrease the dose according to the sugar reports, again check the blood sugar after a week, again adjust the dose till an adequate control is obtained. There are three groups of antidebietic drugs, sulfonylurias like glibandeclamide, glipidide, glimepiride or gliclazide, then bigoonides that is metformin and glitazones, bioblitazone and rosy glitazone. The sulfonylurias act by stimulating the release of insulin from pancreas, so they are useful only when the pancreas is functioning and if given in excess they can produce hypoglycemia. The bigoonides act by increasing the peripheral uptake of glucose, so they do not cause hypoglycemia. They enhance the action of both sulfonylurias and insulin and can be combined with both. The glitazones act by increasing the insulin sensitivity and the peripheral insulin action. They are usually used in combination with the other drugs to enhance their action. Now how to make a choice? If the patient is obese, bigoonide that is metformin is the drug of first choice. If it cannot control the diabetes adequately, then a sulfonyluria like dionyl or glinase or glide can be added. But diabetic diet, exercise, weight reduction and metformin form the basic treatment of an obese diabetic. If the patient is of average or below normal weight, then the treatment is started with a sulfonyluria, either gliband clemide, glipicide or glimaparide. If its maximum dose cannot control the blood sugar, then metformin is added. If full dose of this combination also fails, then the patient may need insulin injections. Now let us consider as an example an obese patient newly detected as a diabetic. If the post-prandial blood sugar is around 160 to 180 or 200 milligram percent, then instruct him to follow a diabetic diet, exercise regularly every day and reduce the weight over the next 3 months. Check fasting and post-prandial blood sugar again after 15 days and 1 month. If it has come to normal, post-prandial blood sugar is less than 140, then continue diabetic diet and exercise. Check the blood sugar once in 6 months. If it has not come to normal, then start a small dose of metformin like tap glycophage half daily. An adequate control will definitely be achieved. If the blood sugar levels tend to fall too low, below 100 milligram percent, then stop the tablet and just observe. Now consider a case where post-prandial blood sugar is between 200 to 250 milligram percent. With diet changes and exercise, you can expect a fall of about 50 to 80 milligram percent depending on how faithfully the patient follows it. A similar fall of about 50 milligram percent can be expected from one tablet of each of the anti-dibetic drugs. With that presumption, if blood sugar is nearing 250 milligram percent, I would start with one tablet of glycophage in the morning in addition to diet and exercise. Of course this is an approximation. After 10 days, check the blood sugar levels and then adjust the dose accordingly. If the blood sugar level is still around 180 to 200, then add another half tablet of glycophage to this regime. Next we will come to a case where post-prandial blood sugar is around 300 milligram percent. The diabetes is even more severe. In this patient you can start with 1 and half to 2 tablets of glycophage, 1 BD, 1 tablet in the morning and half or 1 tablet in the evening. If the sugar is not controlled with 2 tablets of glycophage, then you have 3 choices. Add 1 more tablet of glycophage, 3 tablet or add a cell phone illureia or add a pioglita zone. So, either add 1 more tablet of glycophage but it may be better to add 1 tablet of a cell phone illureia. You may add any cell phone illureia but I will take Glynes as an example. Glynes is glipidide. So the prescription would be tab glycophage 500 milligrams BD plus tab glynes 5 milligram OD. The next step would be to give tab glycophage 500 milligram BD plus tab glynes 5 milligrams BD. Once the patient is well controlled, instead of giving the 2 drugs separately, give a combined tablet like Glynes MF so that the patient has to take only 1 tablet at a time. As I said earlier, at this point instead of increasing the dose of cell phone illureia, you may also add pioglita zone 15 milligrams with lunch, which increases insulin sensitivity and insulin action. However, the effect of pio or rosy glita zone is not seen immediately. The action starts over 2 weeks so you have to have patients and wait and watch. If after 2 months the blood sugar levels are on the lower side of normal, with pioglita zone, then you may have to reduce the dose of cell phone illureia slightly. Another drug that can be added to the regime is acarbos. In some patients, the fasting blood sugar level is normal, but the post-prandial is difficult to control and remains high. This is because in type 2 diabetes there is a delayed and slow insulin secretion from the pancreas. So after meals, when the glucose level rises suddenly, the insulin response is slow and the pp level remains high. Now acarbos delays the absorption of carbohydrates and prevents the sudden glucose load after the meals. It is given in the dose of 25 milligram TDS to be taken with the first bite of each meal. After 4 weeks the dose may be increased to 50 milligram TDS. Only remember that acarbos as well as the glita zones. Pioglita zones. These are potentially hepatotoxic drugs, so watch for anorexia, jaundice, hepatomegally and liver enzymes. The treatment of diabetes is not like treatment of fever which gets over in a few days. It is a lifelong treatment. Once the diabetic patient is stabilized and his daily dose of tablets is adjusted, then the blood sugar levels fasting and pp should be checked at least once in 6 months, earlier if there are any symptoms. Over a span of several years, the requirement of antidiabetic drugs slowly goes on increasing. And in the follow-up, when the blood sugar levels are detected to be higher, the dose has to be increased. This will go on till the maximum dose of both drugs is reached, that is glycifage, 500 milligram TDS and say, dionyl 5 milligram TDS. After this, increasing the dose of oral antidiabetic drugs does not serve any purpose, and it is time to add insulin to your prescription. But before we end this talk on oral antidiabetic drugs, let me tell you about Megalitinide group of drugs, which are like sulfonyl ureas, that is they stimulate the pancreas to secrete insulin, but are very short acting, just 1 to 2 hours. So they are taken just before a meal and will stimulate the pancreas for a short time around the meals. This is very useful for those patients who cannot follow fixed times for their meals. The drug is taken just before the meal, at whatever time it is taken. If a meal is skipped, the dose is not taken. The dose is repaglinide 0.5 to 4 milligrams just before a meal or natteglinide 60 to 120 milligrams 15 minutes before a meal. This drug may also be added if post-prandial levels are persistently high. Now in the next part of the lecture, we will learn more about insulin. When you add insulin to the maximum oral dose, a difficult question is to be answered. What do we do to the oral tablets? Should we continue the maximum dose oral tablets or should we stop oral tablets and give only insulin? If with the maximum oral dose, the blood sugar remains very high about 300 milligrams percent, then oral drugs are not acting at all. There is hardly any insulin production in the pancreas. In this situation, stop the sulfonyl veria. Control the blood sugar with insulin plus metformin and pioglitazone or control with only insulin. But if with the maximum oral dose, the blood sugar is only marginally high, say 200 to 250 milligrams percent. Then you may only add a small dose of insulin and continue the oral tablets also. And this is a stage where within a few more months or years, the patient is likely to become insulin dependent and sooner or later sulfonyl ureas will be of no use. The patient will have to be controlled on insulin. Metformin and pioglitazone increase the insulin sensitivity at the peripheral receptors. So they will always supplement the insulin action, even in insulin dependent diabetes. And sulfonyl ureas are of no use and just waste of money if the pancreas has stopped secreting insulin.