 In this lecture, we will learn about anaphylactic shock. If after giving an injection, patient feels giddy or falls down. If the pulse is feeble or the blood pressure is low, then he has developed an acute sensitivity reaction to the drug and anaphylactic shock. The common drugs which can give rise to anaphylactic shock are penicillin, streptomycin, vitamin B1 preparations like B-complex neurobeyond optinuron, all serum injections like Antitutinous serum, Antisnecvenum, then iron like IMPERON or Jectopher, and iodine containing drugs used for IVP or CT scan. So these injections should be administered only after a test dose. Anaphylactic shock is an emergency that every general practitioner is afraid of, because one such case, especially at the beginning of the career, can ruin the practice and break the doctor's confidence. But should we really fear it? If one knows what anaphylactic shock is, if one takes proper precautions like giving a test dose before administering these injections for the first time, and if one is prepared to treat anaphylaxis with emergency drugs at hand, then one should not be afraid of anaphylactic shock. Before giving these injections like penicillin streptomycin B-complex or serums, always inject 0.1cc of the drug intra-dermally with a 26-number needle and a 1cc syringe. Mark a circle around the site of injection with a ball pen, and make the patient sit in the waiting room for half an hour. If there is a raised wheel at the site of injection, or if there are artycheryl rashes on the body and itching, or if the patient feels giddy, then do not give the injection use some alternate drug. The test dose of inferon should not be given intra-dermally. It will cause skin necrosis. For inferon, give half-cc deep intramascular, and watch for any sensitivity reaction. If there is no reaction, from the next day, give full dose of 2cc deep intramascular. Of course, you should remember that even this 0.1ml test dose can give rise to anaphylaxis in occasional oversensitive individuals. So you should always be on guard, even after giving a test dose. Now if a patient gets anaphylaxis, what should we do? The first thing that you should do when you encounter anaphylaxis is to make the patient lie horizontal, immediately on the ground, or on a bed. Then give 0.5 to 1cc of adrenaline injection subcutaneously. This should be followed by injection of 1 ampule avil, and 1 or 2 hiles of f-corillin, that is hydro cortisone, intra-mascularly. If there is a fall in the blood pressure, and the pulse is feeble, then both these injections should be given intra-vinously, and a fast IV drip of ringer-elected or glucose saline should be started. Adrenaline may be repeated after 10-15 minutes if necessary. If the patient is breathless or has laryngeal strider, then start oxygen and give IV amino phylin. If the anaphylaxis is mild and responds quickly to treatment, then observe the patient for a few hours and then send him home. But if the reaction is severe, it is safer and advisable to take the patient to a hospital or to a physician after giving the initial treatment and IV fluids. At the end, let me warn you once again that adrenaline, f-corillin, avil, and IV fluids should always be available at hand, because reactions always come unexpectedly, and you should never be unprepared. These drugs should be in your clinic and not in the neighboring pharmacy. In such emergencies, you should act boldly, confidently, and quickly. If a spirit swab is not at hand, forget it and give the injection, because time is more important. If f-corillin is not at hand, give betnesol or decadron, but f-corillin that is hydrochortisone acts quickest, so it is to be preferred. To revise, whenever there is an anaphylaxis, make the patient lie horizontal, the first thing wherever he be. Always keep emergency drugs at hand, whether you are in your clinic or on a home visit. Always be prepared for unexpected sensitivity reactions. Never give penicillin, streptomycin, be complex, impheron, and serum injections without a proper test dose. In case of emergency, give one CC adrenaline subcutaneously, followed by aivyl, f-corillin, and ivy fluids. But the most important thing is alertness. An aphylactic reaction may come even after a negative test dose, and even after giving a few injections safely, it may come at the 10th or 50th injection also. So always be prepared. Anytime it comes to unexpected drugs, I have seen commonly used injections like ovaron, ivy phlegial, noalgin, and once a single tablet of analgin causing a life-threatening anaphylaxis. So always stay prepared. Every week check whether these emergency drugs are in their place in your cupboard, and whether the expiry date is valid. By this simple precaution, in case of emergency, you will always find the drugs within a second, which is the most important thing.