 In this lecture, I will give a few tips on how to be a good general practitioner. The basic health care of India is in the hands of general practitioners, which also includes the doctors in Primary Health Centre who play the same role through government machinery. There has been a radical change in the larger cities and metros, where general practitioners are becoming hard to find. New GPs are missing, and there is an outpouring of specialists, super specialists and large corporate hospitals. None of these are good at providing basic, simple day-to-day needs of the patients. They have the latest knowledge, latest and cost-lates gadgets, and the best treatments for major and rare diseases. But when it comes to simple viral fever or common colds, they are lost. You need a GP. The GP also scores on having a holistic approach, a personal touch, and a personal involvement in curing the patient. GP is the backbone of our entire medical field. Fortunately, general practice is well-established and growing in smaller cities and villages, who enjoy the privilege of having a family doctor. Presuming that you are one of the fresh doctors who want to be successful general practitioners, I want to give you some advice. To be successful one has to be a good doctor first. First and foremost you must have sound knowledge. You must learn and understand all diseases and their treatments. That is all the books on general practice that are available in the market. All the knowledge should be at your hand. It is not necessary to read every book from cover to cover, but when you face a difficulty, you should be able to immediately refer to the books, and one of the books will definitely solve your difficulty. It is an investment of just one and half to two thousand rupees, but it is worth more than your decorations of thousands of rupees. It is very essential to work for about one year after completing your medical course, with a good hospital, or a good physician, or a good GP, or preferably a few months with each of them. You should work hard during this period and see maximum number of cases. See how they are actually treated, and see how the senior doctors handle these cases, how they talk with the patients, how they examine them. This is once in a lifetime chance. Once you start your own practice, you cannot go and stand behind another practitioner, because you are not a student anymore. You will also find difficult to ask all the basic and probably silly questions in your mind to anyone. So do all this while you are still in the learning phase. I do not mean that you cannot learn later. You have to, but then it is not so easy. The medical field grows very fast. New drugs are released. New investigations are made available. New modes of treatment are discovered. We as practicing doctors have to learn about them all. How do we do it? We must update our knowledge from time to time. Attend CM is at least the once in your town, or if you are in a small place in the neighboring towns. Discuss cases and topics with your colleagues. Share knowledge with each other. What is most important is that you should have curiosity. Curiosity about everything new happening around. Curiosity about every clinical sign that you see, every difficult case that you see. When your practice is established, you will be seeing a large number of patients every day. Most of them will be routine and you will treat them reflexively. You don't even have to think much for that. But there will be one or two patients who will be tricky, difficult to diagnose and difficult to handle. This is where you should find your enjoyment. Spend some time for this patient. Examine properly. Try to diagnose. Refer the books if necessary. Even if you refer the patient to a consultant, follow up and see how he is diagnosed and treated. This is how your knowledge will grow. And according to me, this is one of the moments to cherish in an otherwise routine and mechanical general practice. You diagnose hypothyroidism. Then a consultant confirms it or the lab tests confirm it. It is a moment of joy, thrill and satisfaction. If you have referred the patient without giving a thought to the clinical science and diagnosis, then not only you have missed this joy and satisfaction, but you have also lost the chance to upgrade yourself. When a similar patient comes to you after say two years, you will again refer him without diagnosing and that is stagnation. Do not stagnate. Keep growing in knowledge and experience. Keep a personal diary on your table. Whenever you learn about a new drug or a new treatment or a new disease, make a note in your diary. And later when you have free time, read more about it from books or from the internet. The next point I wish to tell you is your grooming. Present yourself as a well-dressed, well-mannered and well-grumed person. Patients look up to you as a savior. So look respectable. The patient should feel confident about you when he or she looks at you. Talk confidently. Never get angry at the patient. The patients are often irritable due to their illness and troubles, and they may talk roughly, but you should not lose your cool. You should always maintain a calm attitude towards them. Behaves sympathetically. Listen to the complaints with full attention. Do not attend to other works while examining or listening to a patient. The patient must get 100% attention from you. Understand the problem properly. If the patient has five complaints, find out which complaint has brought him to you today, because that complaint will have to be tackled first. Examine every patient carefully, a quick glance from head to toe, a quick general examination, and careful examination of the area of complaints. Never treat a patient without examination. The patient seeks a satisfaction that the doctor has properly examined him. If he feels that you have not examined him properly, then your treatment will never have the desired effect, because the psychological part of treatment has been ignored. So be a good clinician, examine carefully, and then treat. You may not be able to diagnose some cases. This is absolutely okay, but you should never miss a finding, like enlarged spleen, or jaundice, or edema, or next stiffness. You cannot be excused for missing that examination finding. So examine the patient properly and carefully. Another important thing to learn is to be very gentle with the patient. Your hand should be very gentle. When you palpate, do not poke your finger suddenly. Keep them gently over the part, say abdomen, and then gradually press deeper. If a limb is painful, don't lift it suddenly and make the patient shout. Watch the patient's face and move it gently. Do not make rough movements which are uncomfortable to the patient. This you will face serious patients which are beyond the scope of general practice. In such patients, you should just give a primary first-aid treatment if possible, and arrange to send the patient to the nearest hospital. If it is your regular patient, or if the patient is very serious, then you should accompany the patient to the hospital, meet the doctor in charge, and hand over the responsibility to him. Another visit, or at least enquiry, after a day or so, to see that he is improved will be the best thing you could ever do to cheer up the patient who will always be obliged to you. That brings me to another point. As you start and develop your practice, you should develop good rapport with the consultants in your area, in whom you can confide, and refer the patients for their expert guidance. You must personally know one or two consultants in each specialty, and whenever you have a difficult case, refer the case to them. This is very important, because suppose the patient is not responding to the consultant's treatment, you should be able to discuss the case with the consultant, and talk in the interest of your patient. Also you should discuss the diagnosis, or differential diagnosis of the referred cases with the consultants, so that your own knowledge and experience grows. Keeping and maintaining good relations with all the consultants is a very important aspect of general practice. Even if the patient is referred to a specialist or a hospital, sometimes the general practitioner has to be the moderator to review the overall treatment. The specialists and more so super specialists have a tunnel view approach. They see only the disease. They do not get involved with the patient. They only advise a treatment, and when the patient says, okay, administer it. Only a general practitioner has the power and the will to know the social aspects, past history, whether the patient can afford it, whether it is worth spending money, or whether money in legs, and will the benefits be so rich? The GP knows the family, family background, family problems, financial position, and personal problems, and very often he can help the patient to choose a line of treatment where there is a choice. He is like a family member, but neither from the family nor a beneficiary, so he is in the right position to give a sound advice. Of course, here lies the next point. The aim of every general practitioner should be to be a good family doctor. There are two types of patients in general practice. One termed as floating patients. They move from doctor to doctor. These patients come once or once in a while, and are never seen again. So also patients who have temporarily come from other cities, they also come only once. The second type are the regular patients. They are patients in the neighborhood. If you treat them well, they get attached to you. They bring the other members of their families and their friends, and over a period of time treat you as their close family friend. These patients upgrade your status from a general practitioner to a family doctor. The more the number of families so attached to you, the more successful you are as a family doctor. So when a patient comes to you, after the examination and treatment is over, ask about the family background. Make a note in your mind or in your case paper. Know the family members, especially the elders and the children. After a few visits, you will know all their health problems. So when any member of the family comes, ask about the health of the old grandpa or grandma also. When the lady of the house comes for treatment, ask about her children also. Keep the health record of all the family members in front of your mind. This is the essential quality of a successful family doctor. Of course in such a situation, one family member may pass bad remarks about another or talk about family fights. Always remember that you are only a listener. What is told to a doctor is expected to be kept confidential. Never ever pass on such remarks to the other parties. Never enter into a family fight. Be a distant external observer. Give advice only when it is asked for. But what is told to you in your clinic should always remain confidential. Looking back to our medical practice, I always tell my students to practice honestly. Never give false assurances and false hopes. Don't tell an asthmatic that I am going to cure you. Tell clearly that you will treat him and relieve him of the breathlessness. But when the weather changes again, it may recur. False assurances work for a few days, but then the patient will definitely realize that you are not speaking the truth. Secondly, be honest. If you don't know something or cannot diagnose a patient, never hesitate to send the patient to a specialist or for an investigation. I see large number of patients of cancer esophagus who have dyspagia for two or three months. They are treated by doctors but not referred for esophagus scopy. Or they are advised esophagus scopy, but the doctor has not stressed the urgency and seriousness and has not insisted to go immediately. So what happens? The patient just waste time at home and a curable cancer becomes incurable. Avoid such mistakes. If you are suspecting a serious problem, explain the seriousness to the relate use immediately and help to treat the problem. Thirdly, be honest in treatment. Use standard quality drugs from standard companies. Do not use substandard drugs to save some money. Market is full of such drugs with tempting prices. But the effect is also substandard, which makes you and your practice substandard. When you use best quality drugs, the patient is happy and you are happy. You are never worried that the patient may go to another doctor and get a better relief because you are giving the best. So insist on good quality drugs. That brings me to the last thing that I want to advise you. Concentrate on earning a good reputation. When you are good, money follows you. Be a good general practitioner and not just a rich general practitioner. Not all rich persons are successful. Money is only half the wealth. The other half is the goodwill earned in society. Honest practice is how you earn the goodwill. And whenever possible, offer your helping hand to the society by participating in camps, health check-up camps, free dispensaries for the poor, blood donation drives or any such activity that interests you. As a general practitioner, you are already doing a very noble service to the society. A little more will be the icing on the cake. Enjoy your work. Keep upidating your knowledge. Be the doctor, philosopher and guide to all your families. And never forget that there is one more family waiting for you at your home, your own family. Do sufficient time to your family and take care of the health of their family head to. At the end, let me tell you in short some essential formalities and rules to follow in general practice. Number 1. Be punctual. Stick to your clinic timings strictly. Also be very regular. Avoid for weekly, off day or off half day and predeclared holidays for festivals or family functions or tours. The patients must have a confidence that whenever I go, my doctor will definitely be there. Avoid home visits for emulant patients, that is patients who can walk, as it wastes a lot of your time. But do not refuse visits for bedridden patients and in emergencies. Study the prices and quality of available drugs. Prescribe the cheapest drug from a standard company. Avoid unnecessary drugs and unnecessary injections. Proper referrals is an important aspect of general practice. Have good relations with the consultants of each specialty. Do proper idea of expenditure to the patient when you refer to a specialist so that the patient goes prepared. If you know that the patient is poor and needy, talk to the specialist or to the nursing home and use your good influence to reduce the bills. Do not ever give false certificates and false bills. If you start doing that, very soon you will land up in some legal trouble. And all the offices and schools in your area will give no value to your certificate. As far as the patient is concerned, give your full attention. Do a thorough examination. Be alert to any abnormal symptoms and signs. Be alert to your sixth sense also. If patient is serious, take lead, arrange for an ambulance. Or if need be, take the patient in your own car to the hospital. Take quick decisions. Do not stop at giving just a referral letter. See to it that the patient is properly treated at the referral center because ultimately it is your patient a part of your family. Things to tell are endless. But not all things can be told. You will learn by your own experiences and grow wiser with time. If I have helped you a bit on your path to wisdom, I will be a happy person. For now, my best wishes for you. Thank you.