 I guess we should talk about DK and children. Let's go. Hello and welcome to MK's Medical Review Series. My name is Dr. Moses Kazevo. This is a series on my YouTube channel. We will look at medical topics and deaths. Today in this episode we shall look at diabetic ketoacidosis in children. If you haven't yet subscribed to this channel, please hit the subscribe button, hit the bell notification icon to receive notifications of such videos every time I post. Drop a comment, drop a like and let's go. So in the spirit of the new content that I'm going to be creating on my channel, I'm pretty much going to be introducing a segment before each and every lecture which is known as a warm up segment. Where I will ask you a question. It may be from an osky station extract. It may be from a single best answer. It may be from a true force. It may be from an essay. Then of course I will give you the answer at the end of the video. So make sure that you watch the video till the end. So here's a single best answer. You can actually answer it and then I will give you the answer and you can mark yourself and whether you were correct or wrong. So the following characteristics of diabetes melitis are true except A. Dextrose given to a known diabetic patient in coma with unknown blood sugar may be lifesaving. B. Sodium bicarbonate is administered as management of diabetic ketoacidosis. C. DKA is the most common first presentation in diabetes melitis in children. D. Sugar is freely attached to hemoglobin A1c. So remember that this is pretty much a medical emergency and it's going to be associated with type 1 diabetes. It can also be seen with type 2 diabetes but we're going to be focusing on type 1 diabetes because that's what's much more common in children. And it's obviously due to an absolute insulin deficiency. It's usually can present as the first manifestation of type 1 diabetes especially in adolescents. And in diabetic ketoacidosis you have this uncontrolled catabolism that's going to be associated with insulin deficiency, hyperglycemia, osmotic duracies and dehydration. Now what's going to be characterizing type of ketoacidosis? Number one you're going to have a high blood sugar which is a blood glucose that's greater than 11.1. You have metabolic acidosis which can be evidenced by a bicarbonate concentration that's less than 15 mL. You also have a venous pH that's less than 7.3. You have hyperketonemia that's a concentration of the ketones and the blood that's greater than 3 mL. That's ketonuria that's a concentration of ketones in the urine that's greater than 2 plasso in your standard urine dipstick. Of course you are also going to have features of hypotension and features of dehydration. Now remember that decay can actually occur with absolute insulin deficiency. That's the type 1 type of insulin type 1 type of diabetes rather and relative insulin deficiency. It's a rare complication where they undergo certain stresses or in their bodies and they're going certain amounts of stress which could be metabolic, it could also be physiological stress. Now here remember that the glucose is not going to be entering into the cells. The problem in diabetes is that insulin is like the key to open the cells so the glucose can enter. Now you have a lot of glucose but this glucose is not entering into the cells so it's like you're starving in the midst of plenty. Then remember that decay can present at any age and it's most commonly going to be presenting in puberty. There are some precipitating factors like infections, bacteria infections, intercurrent infections like UTIs, Clapsilla pneumonia, Evan Corona. Accounting for 40%. Disruption of insulin treatment, for example poor compliancy with insulin, discontinuation of insulin 25%. In some cases it may be the first presentations on new onset diabetes and 15%. Others may be due to dehydration, excessive alcohol ingestion which is quite common in adults but of course even adolescents these days are drinking. There may be some stressful conditions like trauma surgery, myocardial infarction which is not so common in the pediatric age group or emotional crisis. Some medications like corticosteroids, thiziduretics and simpathomymetics can actually trigger DKA. And in 40% of the cases, the majority of the cases we actually don't know, we can't really identify what had triggered this DKA. So what exactly is the path of physiology? Here I want you to pay some close attention. Now remember that whatever is causing this trigger, it's putting the body under a certain amount of stress. Now whenever there is increase in stress it means that even the demands for insulin are going to increase. But remember that these demands for insulin cannot be met by the body because the pancreas is not going to be making the insulin. So what is the body going to do? It's going to produce this counter-regulatory hormone because remember insulin is a key for glucose to enter the cell. So the body will take it like as if you do not have glucose. So it will stimulate other processes that are meant to enhance the production of glucose and also use other alternative sources of energy. So what are these counter-regulatory hormones? Glucocon, cortisol, epinephrine and growth hormone. Now remember that these hormones are going to be working in tandem to increase the blood glucose level. So they are going to inhibit processes that use blood glucose. So they will inhibit processes like glycolysis. The inhibit processes like glycogenolysis which is a breakdown of glycogen. They will stimulate processes like gluconeogenesis which is the synthesis of glucose from non-cabohydrate precursors. They will inhibit a breakdown of glycogen rather if I mentioned about inhibiting a breakdown of glycogenit. It's actually stimulated. They inhibit the synthesis which is glycogenesis correction on that. So they are also going to be stimulating the process of glycogenolysis which is the breakdown of glycogenit glucose as well as lipolysis which is pretty much the breakdown of the triglycerizer to free fatty acids and glycerol. Now all these processes are going to be contributing to a high blood glucose level which explains why only check the back glucose level to be higher than 11.1. But remember that glucose in the cells is going to be sought out in the kidneys and under no more circumstances all the glucose is supposed to be reabsorbed. But in this case it's not going to be reabsorbed from the kidneys so it will be lost in the urine because it will exceed its transport maximum. So this will now cause the renotibule to become high osmotic, high proximal blood because there's a lot of glucose in that area. So it's going to pool more water now. This person is going to be losing water in the urinary system so they'll have polyurea. In addition to this remember that the free fatty acids that you're forming in the blood are going to be taken to the liver and then through a process that's known as beta oxidation are going to result in the synthesis of ketones or ketones which are pretty much alternative sources of urine. Some important ketones include acetone, acetoacetate and beta hydroxibutory acid. Now these can also be filtered out in the kidneys and by the kidneys rather and in the urine where when you test for these you'll be able to see them on the urine. They can also be excreted in the lungs through the breath. So this person who has this free fatty, you can also test for these ketones in the blood and this person who has these ketones in the blood. Now remember that because these are keto acids they tend to drop the pH of the blood so even the pH is going to be now becoming acidic. Now remember that the response of your blood being acidic due to metabolic causes is going to be compensated by the respiratory system. So the respiratory centers are going to be stimulated. How does the body think? It thinks that you're retaining a lot of carbon dioxide. So the respiratory centers are stimulated in an attempt to hyperventilate so that you can push out some carbon dioxide to compensate for the acidosis that you have created. So this is what is responsible for all the clinical features that we see in patients with diabetes. Now because of the excessive loss of water through the hyperventilation because every time you breathe out you lose some water through the increase in urine output, the polyurea. This person may present you with some dehydration. They may also have additional things like nausea and vomiting, diarrhea that may also even worsen the dehydration. So I have already explained what is showing on the screen here. In addition they are also going to be an increase in protein breakdown and decrease in protein synthesis because it remembers insulin is an anabolic hormone and its deficiency will lead the body to go into a catabolic state. Because now you also have accumulation of the acidic organic substances, the no material pH will become acidic and of course you will get an increase in an ion gap or talk about what the anion gap is. Now the bicarbonate levels in the blood are also going to drop because you are trying to buffer out these acidosis that you have created. Now this person who have this rapid shallow breaths or sometimes they can have this labored breathing, the air hunger. These rapid shallow breaths are referred to as Kuzmo's respirations. Now they become much more severe especially with increasing acidosis. The patient may also have vomiting and nausea which is induced by of course the ketones. And I have talked about the fruity breath and I have talked about the dehydration. Now I remember that because this person is severely dehydrated blood is going to be shunted out to the vital organs and sometimes to some extent the vital organs are also going to be affected. So this person may actually go into renal impairment or renal failure which is why it's very important to actually look at the urine output of patients with DKA. Now remember that when you have in the initial phases when you have acidosis there is a special channel on red blood cells which is known as a potassium hydrogen exchanger which pretty much takes in hydrogen ions and takes out potassium ions in order to balance that offset that you have created that acidosis, which is such a created. So in the initial phases you may actually have hyperkalemia but as you treat this patient with insulin, because you remember glucose enters into the cells with potassium. Again also because of the osmotic terraces they more or less may present you with hypokalemia so they can present you with hyperkalemia or hypokalemia. One of some of the clinical features they may have a gradual increase in thirst that's polydipsia, they may have polyurea which are very commonly science, they may have features of dehydration, malays generalized weakness, fatigability, nausea and vomiting which may be associated with diffuse abdominal pain that can actually be confused with an acute abdomen. Then you may also have decreased appetite and anorexia, a fruity breath that's a ketone on the breath, acidosic breathing or hyperventilation and explain coma. Then of course there will be a history of rapid weight loss especially in a newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes patient. Most people are going to be dying from hypokalemia or cerebral edema. Now because cerebral edema is unpredictable it occurs much more commonly in younger children and newly diabetics and once they have cerebral edema 80% of them will die so it means if they develop cerebral edema you have to manage that. So there will be some mental state changes, some patients may be mentally alert, a presentation but they may be drowsy, lethargic, confused, sometimes they may even evolve into coma in 5% of the cases. They may be showing signs of dehydration, a dry tongue and bucoma, kosar, post-kinturga, hypotation, increase in heart rate, of course these are due to osmotic duracies, the polydipsia, polyurea, and nocturia. They may have cuspose respiration, deep fast breathing, resulting from the metabolic acidosis, they may also be hyperventilating. It becomes less market in various aviacidosis because they will even have some respiratory depression so it doesn't mean that they are getting better. Then of course they have talked of the fruity breath. Now how do we make a diagnosis? We require O3 of them. If the patient comes in, they are either in non-diabetic patient or they have a black glucose that's greater than 11. The urine dips stick, their ketones in their urine must be greater than 2+. The serum ketones must be greater than 3+. Then of course your atrial blood gases will show a metabolic acidosis, a low-by-carbonate concentration that's less than 15 millimeters, and a pH that's less than 7.3. Then other investigations that you may do like urea and creatinine, they may be raised, serum potassium, of course it may be hypochalemic or hyperkalemic, then of course your serum sodium because of the osmotic effect of glucose in the urine you lose a lot of glucose. And the serum sodium may actually even be low because you lose a lot of water, you lose a lot of electrolytes, especially sodium. Then there will be an increase in the INI and GAP, then you may order for other investigations that look for certain infections. So a complete blood count, liver function tests, urea microscopy, urea microscopy, carcinacetivity, and RDD for malaria or malaria parts, it's light, blood cultures and atrial blood gases. Now what exactly is this anion gap? It's just simply the difference between the measured cations and the measured anions, the routine measured cations and anions, you have sodium potassium chloride in bicarbonate. So you add the concentration of sodium to the concentration of potassium minus the concentration of chloride plus the concentration of bicarbonate. So if you use potassium in the calculation, the normal is between around 16 plus or minus 4, meaning 12 to about 20. Then if you don't use potassium in the calculation, it's about 8 to 16. So this anion gap may be increased or decreased, it's often increased in metabolic acidosis. It's rare that you get a decrease in an anion gap unless if you're discharging some positively charged ions in the urine, for example in proteins that you're actually losing in urine in multiple myeloma. Now what are the principles of management? This is where it's very, very important because this has some difference as compared to management and adults. So you want to correct the dehydration, you want to correct the acidosis and reverse the ketosis, you want to restore the blood glucose to an anomal, avoid any complications of therapy, identify and treat any precipitating events. Now the management, you can use the monicaphypa or sepa, so F of fluids in the electrolyte balance, the S you can use it for solutions, I for insulin, P for potassium and A for antibiotics, if an infection is present. Now remember that children, the guidelines that I'm about to give you are pretty much assuming that this chart has more than 5% dehydration or they have been vomiting or they're drowsy or they're clinically acidotic. Now what's our general advice? You pretty much want to resuscitate the patient first before you do anything else. So check that the airways patent, if the comatose insert an airway and also if the recent deformated insert an NG tube, aspirate and leave it open to drain. Give them oxygen 100% and if they are becoming apnic, a bag and mask ventilation. Then of course the circulation gain IV access with two large balkanulate, take bloods for the lab. Then of course if they're in shock, many of the atachicardic with a pork, a blare rifle, time, cold, clammy skin, cold peripheries and hypotensives, then you can give a bolus, you can give 10 to 20 ml per kg of normal ceiling quickly, that's in about 1 to 2 hours. So I'll give you a practical example, the suppose are using 10 ml per kg and the child is weighing 20 kg. So it would be 10 multiplied by 20. So over 1 to 2 hours or 1 hour they should receive about 200 ml of normal cell light. You can of course repeat this and back until you reach a maximum of 30 ml per kg. Then after you have resuscitated this, I'll take a history and confirm your diagnosis. So your history of polyurean, poly dipsia, your clinical features of acid, doctorate, respirations, dehydration, drowsiness, abdominal pain and even vomiting, your biochemical results of a high blood glucose, ketones in the urine ketones in the blood, glycosurian and ketonuria, assess the level of conscious sleep. You can use your glasca coma scale or blantar coma scale if you're younger than this. And of course assess the level of dehydration because this is very importantığım when you're managing the fluids. Assess for any features of seriobury deema could be things like irritability, a slowed pulse, a high BP and you should also perform a fundo examination that may show you papi loy deema. Then strict input output charts. So if the child cannot avoid on demand or the person is unconscious, so it's a very young child, catheterize the patient. Monitor the blood sugar hourly, weigh the patient, don't use whatever has been recorded before in the other reviews, weigh the patient currently because you use this for the calculation. Then open a glasca coma scale chart or blantar coma scale chart and of course ECG monitoring. So we begin with the fluids. Remember, feapar, fluids insulin, potassium, antibiotics. So you want to begin the fluid replacement before the insulin. So fluids should be given at least one to two hours before the insulin. Now remember that in DKA in a doubt, we were given this fluid quite copious in like 24 hours in a patient that presents with DKA in a doubt with DKA. We don't do that in children because the child is going to be overloaded with fluids, so we don't do that here. The fluid bowlers can actually be given to resuscitate this child and to restore the perforated circulation. And we don't usually even consider it when we're calculating this fluid replacement that we're going to be giving. Now these fluids, whether you're giving them IV and then your transition to ORO, aim to give them evenly over 48 hours. Now how are you going to do this? How much fluid does this child require? So you say your maintenance plus your deficit. Now remember, we're going to be assessing this child for those signs of dehydration. So when you're sensitive child for the signs of dehydration, remember you could have no dehydration, some dehydration or severe dehydration. No dehydration mean that they have lost less than 5% of their body weight. Some dehydration mean that they've lost 5 to 10% of their body weight, some books even give you 5 to 7. Some severe dehydration they've lost more than 10% so some guidelines give you 7 to 10%. Now how do we calculate the deficit? We say the percentage of dehydration. For example if the child has some features of dehydration you would say for example 7% or for easy sake 10% multiplied by their body weight. I'll give you an example in the next slide. And of course the maintenance is calculated 100 mils per kg for the first 10 kg, 50 mils per kg for the next 10 kg and 20 mils per kg for every kg after that. For example if a child weighs 25 kilograms. In 25 you can split it into the first 10, the second 10 to give you 20 and the remainder will be 5. So 10 multiplied by 100 plus 50 multiplied by 10 plus 20 multiplied by 5. That's what I mean by 100 mils for the first 10 kg, 50 mils per kg for the next 10 kg and 20 mils per kg for every kg thereafter. That's the maintenance. So you calculate your deficit, you add it to the maintenance. And of course this is what you will give in 24 hours. Then remember that after 24 hours you go to 48 hours, in the next 24 hours you're not going to give the deficit again. You're going to give another maintenance dose. So you just simply say the maintenance multiplied by 2 you can add the maintenance twice plus your deficit. That's how much you should give over 48 hours. I'll give you a practical example in the next slide. Some people can even give it over 36 hours. Now remember your fluid of choice is normal saline. You can actually use wrinkler's lactate if you don't have normal saline. Normal saline is advised. And of course you should change to DNS once your RBS has fallen to 12 milimos. This is a threshold of 14 to 17 milimos. Then if they have hypernatrhymia then you can use half straight normal saline but please make sure that you consult with your senior first. Here's a practical example. Suppose a 25 kg diabetic patient presents with DKA and severe dehydration. Remember when severe dehydration have lost 10% of their body weight. So 10% of 25 is 2.5 liters. So they've lost about 2.5 liters. That's roughly 2500 mils. So this is our deficit. Our 2500 mils, this is our deficit. Now what's the maintenance of this child over 24 hours? This is 25 kg. So 100 mils for the first 10 kg, 50 mils for the next 10 kg, 20 mils for everything that is remaining. So this gives you 1000, this gives you 500, this gives you 100. So 1000 plus 500 plus 100 gives you 1600. So they should receive 1600 maintenance in addition to this deficit that they have created. Now remember that you want to give this over 48 hours. So it means that the maintenance must be given twice for the first 24 hours and for the next 24 hours. So the deficit plus the first maintenance in that 24 hours when the child reported and the next 24 hours that will give us a total of 5700 mils over 48 hours. But you're not going to be flashing this continuously at once in this child. No, because they will be overloaded. So you want to give it in small equal portions. So if you're giving 500 and 5700 mils over 48 hours, how much should you give in 24 hours? You divide that by two because 48, 24 hours for date hours you divide that by two. So 5700 divided by two, it means that in each 24 hours the child should receive a total of 2850. Then remember we're not going to be giving this again over 24 hours, but we want to now give it into a smaller portion. We give it every 8 hour or every 6 hours. So we're giving 2850 in 24 hours. How much will we give in 8 hours? You simply just divided this by three. So you get 950 mils every 8 hours. You can even further divide this now by age to see how much you should be giving every hour. If you're giving it 6 hour, you can divide this value 2850 by four. So that gives you about 712.5 mils every 8 hours. You can either round this or you can just give 710 mils every 6 hours. That's how we give the fluids in DKA and children. I really hope you understood that if you didn't just rewind the video and go through it slowly, it should make sense. And of course the next thing that we do is giving insulin, which is usually started one to two hours after the treatment. So we use our short acting insulin, the soluble preferably. So this can be given at 0.1 international units per kg per hour is a continuous infusion. One method in which we can do this is we get 50 units of regular insulin diluted in 50 mils of normal cell line. So that's that every mil that you give is equals to one unit. So if we are actually giving or actually looking at the child that we had if we're saying 25 kg multiplied by 0.1. So this is actually receiving about 2.5 units of insulin every hour. So it means that in two hours, they should have received four units. So that's about 4 mils of this infusion. So it should run very slowly. You can actually calculate how many drops this is going to be for you to now reach the 4 units in 2 hours or the 2.5 units or rather, yeah, the 2.5 units in one hour or the 5 units in 2 hours, depending on how it is. So that calculation is very simple. I think I did calculations on my fluid video on how to do the drops per minute. Then an initial bolus is not needed for this because it is increasing the risk of cerebral edema. Then in younger children, and those that are sensitive to insulin give a dose of 0.05 units per kg per hour, provided that the metabolic acidosis is resolving and the blood glucose is dropping. You want to aim to drop the blood glucose between 2 to 5 milimoles per litre per hour. It should not exceed 5 milimoles per litre per hour because if it exceeds this, then it's dropping too quickly. The child can easily go into hypoglycemia. And remember that hypoglycemia would definitely kill you. Hypoglycemia may take some time to kill you, but hypoglycemia kills much quicker. And of course, if it's a continuous, if you can't have a continuous insulin infusion, you can give it hourly or 2 hourly subcutaneous or I am short or rapidly acting insulin now given that you have restored the perifers circulation after you've given your boluses. Now you're given an initial dose of subcutaneous insulin 0.3 units per kg followed one hour later by 0.1 units per kg per hour. Or you can give 0.15 to 0.2 units every 2 hours. Then of course, when the blood glucose is less than 14, we have the dose. We now give 0.05 units per kg per hour to keep the blood glucose around 11 milimoles per litre. Now if the blood glucose drops too quickly or too low before the decay has resolved, you don't decrease the insulin infusion, but rather you just give them much more glucose. Then the next is potassium. So if the potassium is greater than 6 milimoleculevelens per litre, you don't give any potassium chloride. If you see any picked tea waves on the ECG of the patients is anoric, catheterize them and wait for some urine output. Do not give potassium chloride. Then of course, if the potassium is between 4.5 to 6 milimoleculevelens per litre, you can give 10 milimoles of potassium chloride. If it's between 3 to 4.5, you can give 20 milimoles of potassium chloride. You should monitor the levels of potassium and stop the infusion if it's greater than 5 milimoleculevelens per litre. Of course, continue monitoring even after the infusion is stopped in anticipation of any recurrence of hypochalemia. Potassium should be added to every 500 mls of IV flow it's given for the first 24 hours. And of course, ensure that the patient doesn't have acute kidney injury and the patient has past urine, which is very important why you must catheterize this patient. By cobonate is not routinely given in children because it's going to be associated with cerebral edema. Antibiotics can be given and this must be based on the calcium sensitivity patterns for patients at a fibro, give them antibiotics. It's not always indicated, but in most of the cases, we realize that there is a focus of infection. For example, if the glucose is not dropping, you have done everything right, you have given the fluids, you have given the glucose is not dropping, then you should suspect other causes like septicemia or sepsis and you should cover them with antibiotics. Of course, there would be a time when you want to switch them to oral fluids and transition them to subcutaneous insulin injection. So this is done once a substantial clinical improvement where they can either be mild acidosis or ketosis that may still be present, or you now want to switch them to giving them the insulin before meal time. For example, you're regular in sodium subcutaneous 0.25 units per kg before every meal, before breakfast, before lunch, before dinner, then you give the intermediate acting insulin before bedtime. Of course, the total insulin dose is about 1 unit per kg per day. Of course, to prevent the rebound hyperglycemia in the first insulin injection, then you should at least wait 30 minutes if you're using rapidly acting insulin or 1 to 2 hours if you're using regular insulin before stopping the insulin fusion. But you give time for the insulin that you're given subcutaneous lead to be absorbed into start working. And of course, the dose of the insulin can be titrated against the capillary blood glucose. Eventually, you convert them to a long term insulin regimen when they stabilize something that you're going to discharge them on. We'll talk about this later when you talk about that better since children. They are some related complications just to conclude this lecture. You may have things like hypotension, coma, cerebral edema, hypothermia, hypophosphotemia, pneumonia, aspiration pneumonia, DVDs. And maybe some complications associated with therapy, such as hypoglycemia, hypokalemia, hyperkalemia, pulmonary edema as well as hyperchloramic acid doses. Now, getting back to our warm-up question. So the following characteristics of diabetes, melitis are true except. So dextrous is given to a known diabetic patient in coma and known with a known blood sugar, maybe life-saving. This is true. If you don't have the facilities to check the blood glucose of this patient, we always assume that they're hypoglycemia. Because hypoglycemia would definitely kill you faster than hypoglycemia. Then of course, DKA is indeed the most common first presentation. And the sugar does really bind to hemoglobin A1c. But sodium bicarbonate is not administered. So the answer which is incorrect here is B. Sodium bicarbonate is to be administered as management of DKA or diabetic cytosidosis. That's not true. I really hope you enjoyed this video. If you did, please drop a like and drop a comment, share the link to someone who is doing pediatrics. My name is Dr. Moses Kazevu, Tuzambia and beyond. Until next time. Bye-bye.